##GUIDING PRINCIPLES  
###Failing is good; failing quickly is even better.The set of guiding principles that govern how we conduct the tradecraft of Data Science are based loosely on the central tenets of innovation, as the two areas are highly connected. These principles are not hard and fast rules to strictly follow, but rather key tenets that have emerged in our collective consciousness. You should use these to guide your decisions, from problem decomposition through implementation.  
•	*Be willing to fail.* At the core of Data Science is the idea of experimentation. Truly innovative solutions only emerge when you experiment with new ideas and applications. Failure is an acceptable byproduct of experimentation. Failures locate regions that no longer need to be considered as you search for a solution. •	*Fail often and learn quickly.* In addition to a willingness to fail, be ready to fail repeatedly. There are times when a dozen approaches must be explored in order to find the one that works. While you shouldn’t be concerned with failing, you should strive to learn from the attempt quickly. The only way you can explore a large number of solutions is to do so quickly. (TIP: It can be easier to rule out a solution than confirm its correctness. As a result, focus on exploring obvious shortcomings that can quickly disqualify an approach. This will allow you to focus your time on exploring truly viable approaches as opposed to dead ends.)•	*Keep the goal in mind.* You can often get lost in the details and challenges of an implementation. When this happens, you lose sight of your goal and begin to drift off the path from data to analytic action. Periodically step back, contemplate your goal, and evaluate whether your current approach can really lead you where you wan to go.   
 •	*Dedication and focus lead to success.* You must often explore many approaches before finding the one that works. It’s easy to become discouraged. You must remain dedicated to your analytic goal. Focus on the details and the insights revealed by the data. Sometimes seemingly small observations lead to big successes.   
•	*Complicated does not equal better.* As technical practitioners, we have a tendency to explore highly complex, advanced approaches. While there are times where this is necessary, a simpler approach can often provide the same insight. Simpler means easier and faster to prototype, implement and verify. (TIP: If the first thing you try to do is to create the ultimate solution, you will fail, but only after banging your head against a wall for several weeks.)