##THE IMPORTANCE OF REASON###Beware: in the world of Data Science, if it walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, it might just be a moose.  
Data Science supports and encourages shifting between deductive (hypothesis-based) and inductive (pattern-based) reasoning. Inductive reasoning and exploratory data analysis provide a means to form or refine hypotheses and discover new analytic paths. Models of reality no longer need to be static. They are constantly tested, updated and improved until better models are found.The analysis of big data has brought inductive reasoning to the forefront. Massive amounts of data are analyzed to identify correlations. However, a common pitfall to this approach is confusing correlation with causation. Correlation implies but does not prove causation. Conclusions cannot be drawn from correlations until the underlying mechanisms that relate the data elements are understood. Without a suitable model relating the data, a correlation may simply be a coincidence. 
    Correlation without Causation    A common example of this phenomenon is the high correlation between ice cream consumption and the murder rate during the summer months. Does this mean ice cream consumption causes murder or, conversely, murder causes ice cream consumption? Most likely not, but you can see the danger in mistaking correlation for causation. Our job as Data Scientists is making sure we understand the difference. 
    
    
Reason and common sense are foundational to Data Science. Without these, data is simply a collection of bits. Context, inferences and models are created by humans and carry with them biases and assumptions. Blindly trusting your analyses is a dangerous thing that can lead to erroneous conclusions. When you approach an analytic challenge, you should always pause to ask yourself the following questions:  
    •	*What problem are we trying to solve?* Articulate the answer as a sentence, especially when communicating with the end-user. Make sure that it sounds like an answer. For example, “Given a fixed amount of human capital, deploying people with these priorities will generate the best return on their time.”  
•	*Does the approach make sense?* Write out your analytic plan. Embrace the discipline of writing, as it brings structure to your thinking. Back of the envelope calculations are an existence proof of your approach. Without this kind of preparation, computers are power tools that can produce lots of bad answers really fast. (TIP: Better a short pencil than a long memory. End every day by documenting where you are; you may learn something along the way. Document what you learned and why you changed your plan.)  
•	*Does the answer make sense? Can you explain the answer?* Computers, unlike children, do what they are told. Make sure you spoke to it clearly by validating that the instructions you provided are the ones you intended. Document your assumptions and make sure they have not introduced bias in your work.  
•	*Is it a finding or a mistake?* Be skeptical of surprise findings. Experience says that it if seems wrong, it probably is wrong. Before you accept that conclusion, however, make sure you understand and can clearly explain why it is wrong. (TIP: Test your answers with a friendly audience to make sure your findings hold water. Red teams save careers.)  
•	*Does the analysis address the original intent?* Make sure that you are not aligning the answer with the expectations of the client. Always speak the truth, but remember that answers of “your baby is ugly” require more, not less, analysis.  
•	*Is the story complete?* The goal of your analysis is to tell an actionable story. You cannot rely on the audience to stitch the pieces together. Identify potential holes in your story and fill them to avoid surprises. Grammar, spelling and graphics matter; your audience will lose confidence in your analysis if your results look sloppy.  
•	*Where would we head next?* No analysis is every finished, you just run out of resources. Understand and explain what additional measures could be taken if more resources are found.