#CONSUMER BEHAVIOR ANALYSIS FROM A MULTI-TERABYTE DATASET 

##ANALYTIC CHALLENGE  
After storing over 10 years’ worth of retail transaction in the natural health space, a retail client was interested in employing advanced machine learning techniques to mine the data for valuable insights. The client wanted to develop a database structure for long term implementation of retail supply chain analytics and select the proper algorithms needed to develop insights into supplier, retailer, and consumer interactions. Determining the actual worth of applying big data analytics to the end-to-end retail supply chain was also of particular interest.  
 ##OUR APPROACH  The client’s data included 3TBs of product descriptions, customer loyalty information and B2B and B2C transactions for thousands of natural health retailers across North America. Because the data had been stored in an ad-hoc fashion, the first step was creating a practical database structure to enable analytics. We selected a cloud environment in order to quickly implement analytics on the client’s disparate and sometimes redundant datasets. Once we created a suitable analytics architecture, we moved on to identifying appropriate machine learning techniques that would add value across three key focus areas: product receptivity, loyal program analysis, and market basket analysis. For product receptivity, our team used Bayesian Belief Networks (BBN) to develop probabilistic models to predict the success, failure, and longevity of a new or current product. We joined transaction data with attribute data of both successful and failed products to transform the data into usable form. Once we created this data file, we used it to trained BBNs and create a predictive model for future products.For loyalty program analysis, we joined transactional data and customer attribute data, which included location information and shopping trends. We used k-means clustering to segment customers based on their behavior over time. This allowed us to cluster and characterize groups of customers that exhibited similar loyalty patterns. For market basket analysis, we employed Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA), a natural language processing technique, to create consistent product categorization. The client’s product categorization was ad-hoc, having been entered by individual suppliers and retailers. As a result, it was inconsistent and often contained typographical errors or missing values. LDA allowed our team to use the existing text to derive new, consistent customer categories for the market basket analysis. After joining the new product categorization data with transaction data, we used Association Rules Learning to identify sets of product categories that customers tended to purchase together at individual retailer locations.  
##OUR IMPACT  Our team provided key findings and recommendations to describe how the machine learning techniques could be operationalized to provide real-time reporting to retailers. The client received suggestions for improving product nomenclature, product promotions, and end-to-end visibility of the product and process lifecycle. As an example, we used our market basket analysis to create product recommendations for individual retail locations. Our recommendations have the potential to improve sales within certain product categories by up to 50% across the retail network. Together with time savings realized from automated data processing (such as a 300x increase in product categorization speed), these insights demonstrated the clear value of big data analytics to the client’s organization.