#Making Vaccines Safer

##Analytic Challenge

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) is responsible for protecting public health by assuring the safety and efficacy of biologics, including vaccines, blood and blood products. CBER’s current surveillance process, which requires resource-intensive manual review by expert Medical Officers, does not scale well to short-term workload variation and limits long-term improvements in review cycle-time. In addition, the large volume of Adverse Event (AE) reports received by the Agency makes it difficult for reviewers to compare safety issues across products and patient populations. 

CBER engaged Booz Allen Hamilton to develop advanced analytics approaches for the triage and analysis of AE reports. The main goal was to leverage (1) Natural Language Processing (NLP) to alleviate resource pressures by semi-automating some of the manual review steps through techniques, such as text classification and entity extraction, and (2) network visualizations to offer alternative interactions with datasets and support AE pattern recognition. By integrating NLP and network analysis capabilities into the Medical Officer’s review process, Booz Allen successfully provided decision-makers with important information concerning product risks and possible mitigations that can reduce risk.

##Our Approach

We designed and developed a set of prototypes for the analysis and visualization of complex structured and unstructured AE datasets. We developed tools that leverage NLP and network analysis to extend and enhance CBER’s efforts to monitor the safety of biologics and manage safety throughout the product lifecycle. Adverse Event Text Mining Analytics. Reviewing AE reports involves sorting based on the likelihood of a relationship between a product and reported adverse events. Since much of an AE report is unstructured text, and most reports are not directly related to the use of the implicated biologic, manual review is time consuming and inefficient. To address these challenges, we enhanced and integrated tools for text mining and NLP of AE reports using open source tools, including Python and R. By extracting diagnosis, cause of death, and time to onset, and presenting relevant information for review, the text-mining tool streamlines and enhances the post market surveillance process. Adverse Event Network Analytics. Visualizing relationships between vaccines and AEs can reveal new patterns and trends in the data, leading reviewers to uncover safety issues. To assist CBER Medical Officers and researchers in identifying instances where certain vaccines or combinations of vaccines might have harmful effects on patients, we developed an AE network analysis tool using open source tools. This network analyzer allows users to select partitions of the FDA Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS) database, generate a co-occurrence matrix, view networks and network metrics (e.g., betweenness, closeness, degree, strength), and interact with network nodes to gain insights into product safety issues. Other Analytics Solutions. In addition, Booz Allen refactored, modularized, and expended the capabilities of CBER’s computer simulation model of the Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE) agent to improve estimates of variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD) risk for blood products, developed code to handle large amounts of data generated by a Monte Carlo Markov Chain analysis of the spread of influenza, developed a large database analysis strategy involving the application of classification algorithms to simulated genomic data, and implemented a Statistical Analysis Software (SAS) macro that automatically compares the relative potency of a given lot of vaccine using a matched set of dose response curves.

##Our Impact

New methods for post market surveillance of biologics are critical for FDA reviewers who must determine whether reported adverse events are actually a result of a biologic product. With more than 10 million vaccines administered each year to children less than one-year old, CBER reviewers are under pressure to quickly evaluate potential safety signals through manual evaluation of AE reports, review of scientific literature, and analysis of cumulative data using frequency calculations or statistical algorithms. Booz Allen’s support resulted in the development of innovative and data-driven approaches for the analysis of structured and unstructured AE reports. We increased the speed of existing text mining tools by two thousand times, allowing CBER reviewers to run a text mining algorithm to extract information contained in VAERS reports in seconds, instead of hours. We also increased the productivity of Medical Officers through the implementation of text mining and network analysis tools. These new capabilities allow CBER to streamline the post market review process, extract knowledge from scientific data, and address public concerns regarding vaccine safety more quickly and efficiently.
