#REALIZING HIGHER RETURNS THROUGH PREDICTIVE ANALYTICS  
##ANALYTIC CHALLENGE  A major investment house wanted to explore whether the application of Data Science techniques could yield increased investment returns. In particular, the company wanted to predict future commodity value movements based on end-of-day and previous-day equity metrics. The client hoped the predictions could be used to optimize their trading activities. By translating the approach across their entire portfolio, they could dramatically improve the yield curve for their investors. Several challenges were immediately apparent. The data volume was very large, consisting of information from tens of thousands of equities, commodities, and options across most major world markets across multiple time intervals. The need to recommend a predictive action (go short, go long, stay, increase position size, or engage in a particular option play) with very low latency was an even greater challenge. The team would need to develop an approach that addressed both of these implicit constraints.##OUR SOLUTIONThe client challenged Booz Allen to use 3,500 independent variables to predict the daily price movements of 16 financial instruments. The client hid the meaning and context of the independent variables, however, forcing our team to perform analysis without qualitative information. The team immediately began searching for supplemental data sources. We identified unstructured data from other companies, financial institutions, governments and social media that could be used in our analysis. The team paid considerable attention to database access efficiency and security as well as the speed of computation.Our team implemented a multifaceted approach, including a mix of neural network optimization and a variety of principal component, regression, and unsupervised learning techniques. We were able to infer insight into small-scale exogenous events that provided a richer basis for predicting localized fluctuations in the equity prices. Our team was able to use these predictions to determine the optimal combination of actions that would generate the best aggregate return over 12 months of trading. Careful consideration of the residuals and skilled modeling of the variance added additional value to the outcome for this client.   
##OUR IMPACTOur Data Science team conducted an experiment to determine the efficacy of our approach. We used our model to generate buy/sell recommendations based on training data provided by the client. The test cases converged on a set of recommendations in less than ten minutes, satisfying the solution timeliness constraint. The experiment revealed a True Positive accuracy of approximately 85% with a similar outcome for True Negative accuracy when compared against optimal recommendations based on perfect information. The typical return on investment was, as desired, quite large. The ability to determine the position to take, not just for a single financial instrument but also for a complete portfolio, is invaluable for this client. Achieving this outcome required predictive analytics and the ability to rapidly ingest and process large data sets, including unstructured data. This could not have been accomplished without a diverse team of talented Data Scientists bringing the entirety of their tradecraft to bear on the problem.