#Reducing Flight Delays

##Analytic Challenge

Domestic airline departure delays are estimated to cost the U.S. economy $32.9 billion annually. The Federal Aviation Administration’s (FAA’s) Traffic Flow Management System (TFMS) is used to strategically manage flights and includes a flight departuredelay prediction engine which applies simple heuristics to predict flight delays. However, the limited predictive power of these heuristics constrains the FAA’s ability to act in accordance with its existing departure-delay management plan. In response, the FAA’s NextGen Advanced Concepts and Technology Development Group wanted to create a predictive probabilistic model to improve aircraft departure time predictions. This new model would help the FAA understand the causes of departure delays and develop policies and actions to improve the reliability of departure time predictions for real-time air traffic flow management.   

##Our Approach

The commercial aviation industry is rich in flight operations data, much of which is publicly available through government websites and a few subscription vendors. Booz Allen Hamilton leveraged these sources to gather over 4 TB of data detailing tarmac and airspace congestion, weather conditions, network effects, Traffic Management Initiatives, and airline and aircraft-specific attributes for every commercial flight departing from U.S. airports between 2008 and 2012. This data included over 50 million flights and around 100 variables for each flight. The data included composite variables (e.g. incoming flight delay) that were constructed from the raw data to capture relevant dynamics of flight operations. Data acquisition, processing, quality control, and accuracy between disparate datasets were important steps during this process. The team applied supervised learning algorithms to develop Bayesian Belief Network (BBN) models to predict flight departure deviation. The most critical steps in model development were the selection of optimal algorithms to discretize model variables, and the selection of appropriate machine learning techniques to learn the model from the data. The team followed information theory principles to discretize model variables to maximize the model’s predictive power, and to represent the data as closely as possible with the least amount of network complexity. Booz Allen segmented the model variables into three different categories based on the time to flight departure: 24 hours, 11 hours, and one hour. Certain flight variables could only be known for specific pre-departure times. For example, the tarmac and airspace congestion variables for a flight are only known just before the flight, and hence those variables feature only in the one hour category. Departure delays were predicted for each of the three time horizons.

##Our Impact

For a typical airport, the model delivers a delay prediction improvement of between 100,000 and 500,000 minutes annually over previous FAA predictions. The model can be used by a range of aviation stakeholders, such as airlines, to better understand and predict network flight delays. This can improve the airlines’ operational decisions to include more proactive schedule adjustments during times of disruption (e.g. weather or sector load). The improved reliability of departure prediction will improve FAA's predictions for airports, sectors, and other resources, and has the potential to enable improved real-time traffic flow management, which can significantly reduce airline departure, delays, and the associated economic costs. This means a more efficient and effective air transportation network.
