#STRATEGIC INSIGHTS WITHIN TERABYTES OF PASSENGER DATA##ANALYTIC CHALLENGE  
A commercial airline client was faced with increasing market competition and challenges in profitability. They wanted to address these challenges with rapid deployment of advanced, globalized analytical tools within their private electronic data warehouse. In the past, the client had analyzed smaller datasets in-house. Because smaller datasets are filtered or diluted subsets of the full data, the airline had not been able to extract the holistic understanding it was seeking. Booz Allen was engaged to create capabilities to analyze hundreds of gigabytes of client data. The ultimate goal was to generate insights into airline operations, investment decisions and consumer preferences that may not have been apparent from studying data subsets. Specifically, the airline wanted to be able to understand issues such as: how they perform in different city-pair markets relative to competitors; how booking behaviors change, based on passenger and flight characteristics; and how connection times impact demand.
##OUR SOLUTION  
Due to data privacy issues, our team set up a cloud environment within the client’s electronic data warehouse. Leveraging this analytic environment, analysis proceeded with an approach that focused on the client’s three priorities: market performance, booking behavior, and passenger choice.We performed probabilistic analysis using machine learning techniques, particularly Bayesian Belief Networks (BBN). We merged passenger booking and other data to create a BBN training file. Our team developed and validated comprehensive BBN models to represent significant customer behavior and market-based factors that influence passenger preference, with respect to selection of flights by connection times. Finally, our team developed custom big data visualizations to convey the findings to technical and non-technical audiences alike.##OUR IMPACT  
We demonstrated the ability to rapidly deploy big data analytical tools and machine learning on massive datasets located inside a commercial airline’s private cloud environment. Results included insights that seemed counterintuitive, but could improve financial performance nonetheless. An example of one such finding was that under certain circumstances, passengers are willing to pay a premium to book itineraries with modified connection times. This translates into a potential revenue increase of many millions of dollars. These insights, often at the level of named customers, can be acted upon immediately to improve financial performance. 