#Streamlining Medication Review

##Analytic Challenge

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is responsible for advancing public health by supporting the delivery of new treatments to patients; assessing the safety, efficacy and quality of regulated products; and conducting research to drive medical innovation. Although the FDA houses one of the world’s largest repositories of regulatory and scientific data, reviewers are not able to easily leverage data-driven approaches and analytics methods to extract information, detect signals and uncover trends to enhance regulatory decision-making and protect public health. In addition, a rapid increase in the volume, velocity and variety of data that must be analyzed to address and respond to regulatory challenges, combined with variances in data standards, formats, and quality, severely limit the ability of FDA Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) regulatory scientists to conduct cross-study, cross-product, retrospective, and meta-analysis during product reviews. 

Booz Allen Hamilton was engaged to research, develop, and evaluate emerging informatics tools, methods, and techniques to determine their ability to address regulatory challenges faced by the FDA Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER). The main goal was to enable the CDER community to fully utilize the agency’s expansive data resources for efficient and effective drug review through the design and development of informatics capabilities based on Natural Language Processing (NLP), data integration, and data visualization methodologies.

##Our Approach

To support transformational change at CDER, we designed and developed a set of informatics prototypes for the analysis and modeling of complex structured, unstructured, and fragmented datasets. We developed multiple prototypes to enable the evaluation of emerging informatics tools, methods, and techniques and their ability to enable a critical-value driver – e.g., co-locate complex, heterogeneous data to identify patterns and foster development of strategies to protect public health. For example, we implemented NLP algorithms to compare adverse events across datasets, and geographic visualization capabilities to support the inspection of pharmaceutical manufacturing facilities. Product Safety Analytics. The review, surveillance, and analysis of adverse events throughout the product lifecycle require significant resources. The ability to identify actionable insights that lead to informed decision-making requires significant investment of effort, including the active and passive surveillance of adverse events. To address these challenges, we developed a Product Safety Dashboard that compares adverse events listed in the product label (i.e., package inserts) with data from the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS). Using NLP, we extracted adverse events from the product label to create a structured table of label data out of unstructured text. This dashboard allows safety evaluators to view whether or not a reported adverse event is already known, without having to access an external data source and read through product labels. Product Quality Analytics. To support CDER’s mission of reviewing and managing product quality, novel methodologies and tools are needed to improve the efficiency and efficacy of the product quality-review process. Integration of disparate data sources is the first step in building a comprehensive profile of manufacturers, facilities, and the products associated with individual facilities. To address these challenges, we developed a Facility Inventory Report to show the geographic location of facilities and their associated metadata. This geovisualization tool processes and transforms raw data into a user-friendly visual interface with mapping features to enhance the surveillance capabilities of CDER and provide reviewers with the ability to establish connections between facility data and product quality.

##Our Impact

Since the FDA is responsible for regulating 25 cents of every dollar that Americans spend, the agency’s ability to fully use regulatory datasets and meaningfully integrate previously incompatible data to rapidly detect product quality and safety issues is critical for safeguarding public health. NLP approaches provide CDER with the ability to more efficiently search a broader range of textual data and enhances the ability to gain insight from additional data forms that may seem unrelated. Data integration and visualization directly increase the efficiency of researchers by reducing their time spent on searching for frequently-performed aggregate or granular calculations, and by proactively presenting the most frequently desired data to the reviewer through thoughtful and contextual dashboards designed to reveal patterns and trends in disparate data sources. These new capabilities position the FDA to enhance regulatory decision-making, drive advances in personalized medicine, and enable earlier detection of safety signals in the general population.
