##Curse of Dimensionality Case Study -- Baking the Cake
*Author: Stephanie Rivera, Booz Allen Data Scientist*

I was once given a time series set of roughly 1,600 predictor variables and 16 target variables and asked to implement a number of modeling techniques to predict the target variable values. The client was challenged to handle the complexity associated with the large number of variables and needed help. Not only did I have a case of the curse, but the predictor variables were also quite diverse. At first glance, it looked like trying to bake a cake with everything in the cupboard. That is not a good way to bake or make predictions. 

The data diversity could be partially explained by the fact that the time series predictors did not all have the same periodicity. The target time series were all daily values whereas the predictors were daily, weekly, quarterly, and monthly. This was tricky to sort out, given that imputing zeros isn't likely to produce good results. For this specific reason, I chose to use neural networks for evaluating the weekly variable contributions. Using this approach, I was able to condition upon week, without greatly increasing the dimensionality. For the other predictors, I used a variety of techniques, including projection and correlation, to make heads or tails of the predictors. My approach successfully reduced the number of variables, accomplishing the client's goal of making the problem space tractable. As a result, the cake turned out just fine.
